Profiling documentation (#317)
signalfx/signalfx-dotnet-tracing: docs/internal/thread-sampling.md

> :construction: The thread sampler feature is experimental.

# About the .NET thread sampling

The SignalFx Instrumentation for .NET includes a continuous thread sampler
that can be enabled with a configuration setting. This sampler periodically captures
the call stack state for all .NET threads and sends these

> to the Splunk Observability Cloud. You can then view a flamegraph of application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the Splunk Observability Cloud. You can then view a flame graph of application
```

call stacks and inspect individual code-level call stacks for relevant traces.

## How does the thread sampler work?

> The profiler leverages the [.NET profiling](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/unmanaged-api/profiling/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The profiler leverages [.NET profiling](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/unmanaged-api/profiling/)
```

to perform periodic call stack sampling. For every sampling period,
the runtime is suspended

> then the samples for all managed thread are saved into the buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the samples for all managed thread are saved into the buffer,
```

> and the runtime is resumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, then the runtime resumes.
```

The separate managed-thread is processing data from the buffer

> and sents it to the Collector.

Reviewer 2: typo: `sends`

> and sents it to the Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and sents it to the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

> To make the process more efficient sampler is utilizing two independent buffers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the process more efficient, the sampler uses two independent buffers
```

> used to store samples anternately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to store samples alternatively.
```

Stack trace data is embedded as a string inside of an OTLP logs payload. The
[Splunk OpenTelemetry Connector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)

> will detect this profiling data inside of OTLP logs and will help it along

Reviewer: ```suggestion
detects profiling data inside OTLP logs and forwards it to
```

> its ingest path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Splunk APM.
```

# Requirements

* .NET Core 3.0 or .NET 5.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo10` available in runtime).
* [Splunk OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)
version 0.33.1 or higher.
_Sending profiling data directly to ingest is not supported at this time_.

> * Profiler is enabled at startup (disabled by default, see the Configuration section)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we can safely remove this line from the requirements.

# Enable the profiler

To enable the profiler, set the `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED` environment variable

> to `true` to your .NET process.

Reviewer 2: ```
to `true` to your .NET process.
```
I think
```
to `true` for your .NET process.
```
sounds better

> to `true` to your .NET process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to `true` for your .NET process.
```

# Configuration settings

> Please check [description](internal-config.md) for following environment variables

Reviewer 2: for `the` following

> Please check [description](internal-config.md) for following environment variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the [documentation](internal-config.md) for the following environment variables:
```

* `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_PERIOD`.

> We strongly recommend using defaults for these settings.

# Escape hatch

> The profiler limits its own behavior when both both buffers

Reviewer 2: `both` used twice

used to store sampled data are full.

This scenario might happen when the thread to process data is not able
to send data to collector in the given period of time.

> Thread sampler will resume when any of buffers will be empty.

Reviewer 2: Thread sampler will resume when any of buffers `are` empty.

> Thread sampler will resume when any of buffers will be empty.

Reviewer: Can we explain the behavior with more detail? This is what we use for the Java profiler:

> If there are less than 100 megabytes of space available for the Java Virtual Machine, AlwaysOn Profiling enables the recording escape hatch, which appears in the logs as com.splunk.opentelemetry.profiler.RecordingEscapeHatch. The escape hatch drops all logs with profiling data until more space is available.
> 
> To avoid the loss of profiling data due to the escape hatch, provide enough resources to the JVM.

Reviewer: I'd also move this to Troubleshooting.

> # FAQ / Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Troubleshooting the .NET profiler
```

## How do I know if it's working?

> At startup, the agent will log the string "Thread sampling initialized" at `INF`.

Reviewer 2: At `the` startup

You can grep for this in your logs to see something like this:

```text
2022-01-13 13:30:02.601 +01:00 [INF] Thread sampling initialized.  { MachineName: ".", Process: "[11524 dotnet]", AppDomain: "[1 Samples.Profiling]", AssemblyLoadContext: "\"Default\" System.Runtime.Loader.DefaultAssemblyLoadContext #1", TracerVersion: "0.2.0.0" }
```

## How can I see the profiler configuration?

> The agent logs the profiling configuration at `INF` during startup. You can grep

Reviewer 2: `the` startup

> The agent logs the profiling configuration at `INF` during startup. You can grep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agent logs the profiling configuration as log messages at `INF` level during startup. You can grep
```

> for the string `TRACER CONFIGURATION` to see configuration.

Reviewer 2: `the` configuration

> ## What about this escape hatch?
> 
> If the escape hatch becomes active, it will log with
> `Skipping a thread sample period, buffers are full.`
> (you can grep for this in the logs).
> You may also look for `"** THIS WILL RESULT IN LOSS OF PROFILING DATA **"`
> as a big hint that things are not well.
> 
> If you see such logs, please check the configuration and communication layer
> between your process and the Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What does the escape hatch do?

The escape hatch automatically discards profiling data
if the ingest limit has been reached.

If the escape hatch activates, it logs the following message:

`Skipping a thread sample period, buffers are full.`

You can also look for `"** THIS WILL RESULT IN LOSS OF PROFILING DATA **"`.

If you see these log messages, check the configuration and communication layer
between your process and the Collector.
```

## What if I'm on an unsupported .NET version?

If you want to use the profiler and see this in your logs, you must upgrade
your .NET version to .NET Core 3.0 or .NET 5.0 or higher.

> Any of .NET Framework versions is not supported.

Reviewer 2: I would rather use `None` instead of `Any` and turn it around
```
None of the .NET Framework versions is supported.
```

> Any of .NET Framework versions is not supported.

Reviewer: What message?

## Why is the OTLP/logs exporter complaining?

Collector configuration issues may prevent logs from being exported and profiling
data from showing in Splunk Observability Cloud.

Check for the following common issues:

* Look at the values of the agent's configuration,

> especially `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`. Hint: they are logged at startup (see above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
especially `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`. They are logged at startup.
```

* Verify that a collector is actually running at that endpoint and that the
application host/container can resolve any hostnames

> and actually connect to the given OTLP port (default: 4318)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and connect to the given OTLP port (default: 4318).
```

* Make sure you are running the [Splunk OpenTelemetry Connector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)

> and that the version is 0.33.1 or greater.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and that the version is 0.33.1 or higher.
```

> Other collector distributions may not be able to route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other collector distributions might not be able to correctly route
```

> the log data containing profiles correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the log data containing profiles.
```

Stack trace data is embedded as a string inside of an OTLP logs payload. The
[Splunk OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)
will detect this profiling data inside of OTLP logs and will help it along
its ingest path.

# Requirements

* .NET Core 3.1 or .NET 5.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo10` available in runtime).
* [Splunk OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)
version 0.33.1 or higher.
_Sending profiling data directly to ingest is not supported at this time_.
* Profiler is enabled at startup (disabled by default, see the Configuration section)

# Enable the profiler

To enable the profiler, set the `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED` environment variable
to `true` for your .NET process.

# Configuration settings

Please check [description](internal-config.md) for the following environment variables

* `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_PERIOD`.

> We strongly recommend using defaults for `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_PERIOD`.

# Escape hatch

The profiler limits its own behavior when both buffers
used to store sampled data are full.

> This scenario might happen when the thread to process data is not able

Reviewer 2: I think that would sound better:
`This scenario might happen when the thread processing the data is not able`

Reviewer 3: Maybe even `This scenario might happen when the data processing thread is not able` ?

to send data to collector in the given period of time.

> Thread sampler will resume when any of buffers are empty.

Reviewer 2: any of `the` buffers

> :construction: The thread sampler feature is experimental.

> # About the .NET thread sampling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# About the .NET thread sampler
```

# Requirements

* .NET Core 3.0 or .NET 5.0 or higher (`ICorProfilerInfo10` available in runtime).
* [Splunk OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)
version 0.33.1 or higher.
_Sending profiling data directly to ingest is not supported at this time_.
* Profiler is enabled at startup (disabled by default, see the Configuration section)

# Enable the profiler

To enable the profiler, set the `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED` environment variable
to `true` to your .NET process.

# Configuration settings

Please check [description](internal-config.md) for following environment variables

* `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_ENABLED`,
* `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_PERIOD`.

> > We strongly recommend using defaults for these settings.

Reviewer 3: I would say that setting `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL` to another remote collector should be totally fine 🤔

Author: I will rephrase, We strongly recommend using defaults for `SIGNALFX_THREAD_SAMPLING_PERIOD`.

Reviewer: We don't say "We recommend" in Splunk docs. I'd remove this note.

# Escape hatch

The profiler limits its own behavior when both both buffers
used to store sampled data are full.

This scenario might happen when the thread to process data is not able
to send data to collector in the given period of time.

Thread sampler will resume when any of buffers will be empty.

# FAQ / Troubleshooting

## How do I know if it's working?

> At startup, the agent will log the string "Thread sampling initialized" at `INF`.

Reviewer 3: can we use another term than `agent`?
even `SignalFx Instrumentation for .NET` explicitly is less confusing
applies to other places as well

> You can grep for this in your logs to see something like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can grep for this in the logs to see something like this:
```

when I saw `your logs` I was thinking about the instrumented application logs

between your process and the Collector.

## What if I'm on an unsupported .NET version?

If you want to use the profiler and see this in your logs, you must upgrade
your .NET version to .NET Core 3.0 or .NET 5.0 or higher.
Any of .NET Framework versions is not supported.

## Why is the OTLP/logs exporter complaining?

Collector configuration issues may prevent logs from being exported and profiling
data from showing in Splunk Observability Cloud.

Check for the following common issues:

* Look at the values of the agent's configuration,
especially `SIGNALFX_LOGS_ENDPOINT_URL`. Hint: they are logged at startup (see above).
* Verify that a collector is actually running at that endpoint and that the
application host/container can resolve any hostnames
and actually connect to the given OTLP port (default: 4318)
* Make sure you are running the [Splunk OpenTelemetry Connector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)
and that the version is 0.33.1 or greater.
Other collector distributions may not be able to route
the log data containing profiles correctly.
* Make sure that the collector is configured correctly to handle profiling data.

> By default, the [Splunk OpenTelemetry Connector](https://github.com/signalfx/splunk-otel-collector)

Reviewer 3: Change `Splunk OpenTelemetry Connector` to `Splunk OpenTelemetry Collector` -> applies to other places as well
